Ciénaga de Pijiño: An Ecological & Cultural Cruise from Mompox
Facebook
X (Twitter)
Instagram
Home
About
About Nomadic Niko
Travel With Nomadic Niko
Greek Heritage Tours of Asia Minor
Partners and Affiliates
Bookaway
MegaPass
Paisadventure
SafetyWing – Travel Medical Insurance
Saily eSIM Data Plans
Legal Stuff
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
Change Privacy Settings
Misc.
Misc. Posts
World Cup & International Football Tournaments
Contact
Africa
Egypt
Asia
Armenia
Georgia
Israel
Palestine
Europe
Albania
Bulgaria
England
Germany
Greece
Italy
Romania
Spain
Turkey
Ukraine
North America / Caribbean
Aruba
Canada
Curaçao
Mexico
Panama
South America
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Peru
Uruguay
United States
East
Alabama
Florida
Georgia
Illinois
Indiana
Kentucky
Michigan
Ohio
Tennessee
Wisconsin
West
Arizona
California
Colorado
Minnesota
Nebraska
Nevada
New Mexico
Texas
Utah
Washington
Wyoming
Caribbean Region of Colombia
Ciénaga de Pijiño
4 Mins Read
Last updated on June 21, 2026 .
While in Mompox , we decided to take an ecological cruise down the Magdalena River to the Ciénaga de Pijiño, a large swamp.
Jump To
Toggle
How to Tour the Ciénaga de Pijiño
Cruising the Magdalena River
The Canal to Ciénaga de Pijiño
Ciénaga de Pijiño
Village of Pijiño
Returning to Mompox
Map of the Ciénaga de Pijiño
How to Tour the Ciénaga de Pijiño
Tours cost COP$120,000 per person (as of June 2026). We bought our tickets from a man selling tours on the street for Valerosa Tours, but you can also get them at the old Market Building along La Albarrada . Tours last three hours and leave from Plaza de San Francisco at 3pm. Guides speak Spanish only.
Our tour boat
Cruising the Magdalena River
After boarding the small motorized boat, we took off down the Magdalena River. Our guide talked a bit about life on the river as we passed some small communities. He also showed us how the banks of the river were eroding, swallowing up entire trees in the process.
Cruising the Magdalena River
A home along the Magdalena River
Men in a boat
Erosion on the riverbanks
The Canal to Ciénaga de Pijiño
30 minutes later, we came to the village of Peñoncito. It sits at the mouth of a small natural canal that runs between the river and the ciénaga. We turned down the canal and continued our journey.
Locals in Peñoncito
Boys swimming in the river
Canal
At times, the captain would turn off the engines and point out birds along the way. We saw kingfishers, hawks, cormorants, and many more different species. I lost count after about 15.
Kingfisher
Hawk resting on a post
Falcon
Cormorants resting in a tree
We were also able to observe life along the canal. There were a few very simple houses inhabited by cattle farmers. Cows grazed along the canal. We also saw several gigantic iguanas resting on the banks.
A structure along the canal
Cattle grazing along the canal
A man paddling down the canal
Iguana on the banks of the canal
Ciénaga de Pijiño
Finally, the canal started to widen and we entered the ciénaga. It was a huge shallow lake dotted with plants and fishermen in small canoes.
Entering the Ciénaga de Pijiño
Ciénaga de Pijiño
Ciénaga de Pijiño
A man in a boat
Village of Pijiño
We crossed over to the other side of the ciénaga until we came to the village of Pijiño . Several children rushed out to greet us and put planks down to help us step off the boat.
Approaching Pijiño
Children carrying planks to the boat
Children greeting passengers
We walked over to a recently constructed promenade (malecón) next to the ciénaga. Nearby, a group of locals was playing football.
Promenade
Promenade
Football field
From the promenade, we were able to look out onto the ciénaga, spotting flocks of birds flying through the air and taking in the beautiful natural setting. Some of our group decided to take a swim and headed back to the boat.
Ciénaga de Pijiño
Birds flying over the Ciénaga de Pijiño
People swimming in the Ciénaga de Pijiño
Children on the promenade
While we waited for the swimmers to return, Marisol and I played football with the local children.
Children playing football
Marisol with the children
We also took a quick walk into the village. It was interesting to see how the locals lived in such a remote place.
The road into Pijiño
Pijiño
Returning to Mompox
When the boat came back to pick us up, we returned to Mompox and got a panoramic view of the town from the river. All in all, it was a great way to spend the afternoon.
Mompox from the Magdalena River
Mompox from the Magdalena River
Map of the Ciénaga de Pijiño
View map
colombian culture nature river cruises wildlife
0
Author
nomadicniko
Owner of Paisadventure. World traveler. Purdue Boilermaker. Chicago sports lover. Living in Colombia.
Website
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
Related Posts
Palomino
Tayrona National Park
Buritaca
Write A Comment Cancel Reply
Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
Δ
This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.
Travel with me!
Ready to hit the road? Still holding onto those unused miles?
Since 2016, I’ve been leading hassle-free private tours across Colombia, Turkey, Greece, and beyond through my company, Paisadventure. I’ll work with you to design a fully customized itinerary tailored to your interests and travel style.
Once everything is set, all you need to do is book your flight — I’ll take care of the rest.
Click here to learn more and start planning your trip today! Travel & Transportation
Get Covered with SafetyWing*
SafetyWing travel medical insurance is the perfect companion whether you’re taking a short trip or living abroad! They’ve got your back with coverage in 180+ countries, 24/7 human support, and a simple claims process.
Saily eSIM Data Plans*
Want a hassle-free way to get online while traveling? Say hello to Saily!
Available in over 160 countries, their flexible eSIM data plans help you reduce or even eliminate international roaming fees AND save time, so you can enjoy your trip without missing a beat. Saily is built by Nord Security, trusted by over 14 million people worldwide, and is compatible with both iOS and Android. Travel & Transportation
Click here to learn more about Saily , or here to get started . Don’t forget to use this promo code to get 5% off: nomadicniko
Save Time & Money with MegaPass*
Get the most out of your trip while saving time and money! MegaPass lets you purchase attraction tickets or money-saving combo tickets before leaving home. Get to your destination and hit the ground running !
Take advantage of skip-the-line tickets for top attractions in over 50 cities worldwide. You’ll also find hidden hotspots as well as entertaining activities and unique experiences. Click here to learn more or to get started with MegaPass !
Need a Ride? Check Out Bookaway!*
Book a bus, ferry, and train tickets in 135 countries with Bookaway. Don’t waste time standing in line or risk hearing “sorry, it’s full”. Instead, get peace of mind and don’t miss a beat. Use the coupon code NOMADIC5 for a discount.
Check Out My Feature in a Redfin Article
I was named an expert in the recent Redfin article. Read the full article here: Exploring the Chicago Art Scene: A City of Creatives | Rent | ApartmentGuide
My Travel Map
Where I've Been
Where am I going next?
Popayán, Colombia – Dec. 6-8
Buga, Colombia – Dec. 9-10
Cali, Colombia – Dec. 11-14
Top 10 Places I Want To Visit
Cambodia
Cuba
Greenland
India
Philippines
Portugal
Rome
Tanzania
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
*** Affiliate Notice
*This contains an affiliate link. By clicking on the link, you receive an offer at no cost to you, and, if you make a purchase, I receive a small “thank you” – a win-win for both of us!
Legal Stuff
Nomadic Niko by
Nicholas Pangere
is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License
.
© Nick Pangere and nomadicniko.com, 2026. Unauthorized use and/or duplication of this material without express and written permission from this blog's author and/or owner is strictly prohibited. Excerpts, photos and links may be used, provided that full and clear credit is given to Nick Pangere and nomadicniko.com with appropriate and specific direction to the original content.
In other words, please ask permission if you would like to use my photos or content. All I ask is for proper credit with my name and website in return.
© 2026 ThemeSphere. Designed by ThemeSphere .
Top
Jump To
×
How to Tour the Ciénaga de Pijiño
Cruising the Magdalena River
The Canal to Ciénaga de Pijiño
Ciénaga de Pijiño
Village of Pijiño
Returning to Mompox
Map of the Ciénaga de Pijiño
→
Jump To