Mompox: a colonial island in the Magdalena River | Tourism | Colombia Travel
Skip to Content
↵ ENTER
Skip to Navigation
↵ ENTER
Open Accessibility Toolbar
↵ ENTER
Skip to Footer
↵ ENTER
Accessibility
Accessibility Preferences
(Ctrl + Shift + A)
en
English
Accessibility Statement
Oversize Widget
Reading Mask
High Contrast
Font Size
100%
Line Height
100%
Letter Spacing
100%
Content Scaling
100%
Readable Font
Align Right
Align Center
Align Left
Hide Images
Highlight Links
Text Magnifier
Highlight Titles
Hide Widget
Reset
Report a Problem
Menu
Where to go
What to do
Practical information
Blog
Near you
Recent Contents
Search
Login
Why Colombia?
Destinations for your event
Success stories
Blog
Search
Enter
Turismo Vacacional
Industria de Reuniones
Portales asociados
Welcome, you are in COLOMBIA TRAVEL
Where to go
What to do
Practical information
Blog
Near you
Recent Contents
Search
Login
EN ES
DE
FR
ZH
RU
PT
JA
KO
Otros Lenguajes
Select Language Abkhaz Acehnese Acholi Afar Afrikaans Albanian Alur Amharic Arabic Armenian Assamese Avar Awadhi Aymara Azerbaijani Balinese Baluchi Bambara Baoulé Bashkir Basque Batak Karo Batak Simalungun Batak Toba Belarusian Bemba Bengali Betawi Bhojpuri Bikol Bosnian Breton Bulgarian Buryat Cantonese Catalan Cebuano Chamorro Chechen Chichewa Chinese (Simplified) Chinese (Traditional) Chuukese Chuvash Corsican Crimean Tatar (Cyrillic) Crimean Tatar (Latin) Croatian Czech Danish Dari Dhivehi Dinka Dogri Dombe Dutch Dyula Dzongkha Esperanto Estonian Ewe Faroese Fijian Filipino Finnish Fon French French (Canada) Frisian Friulian Fulani Ga Galician Georgian German Greek Guarani Gujarati Haitian Creole Hakha Chin Hausa Hawaiian Hebrew Hiligaynon Hindi Hmong Hungarian Hunsrik Iban Icelandic Igbo Ilocano Indonesian Inuktut (Latin) Inuktut (Syllabics) Irish Italian Jamaican Patois Japanese Javanese Jingpo Kalaallisut Kannada Kanuri Kapampangan Kazakh Khasi Khmer Kiga Kikongo Kinyarwanda Kituba Kokborok Komi Konkani Korean Krio Kurdish (Kurmanji) Kurdish (Sorani) Kyrgyz Lao Latgalian Latin Latvian Ligurian Limburgish Lingala Lithuanian Lombard Luganda Luo Luxembourgish Macedonian Madurese Maithili Makassar Malagasy Malay Malay (Jawi) Malayalam Maltese Mam Manx Maori Marathi Marshallese Marwadi Mauritian Creole Meadow Mari Meiteilon (Manipuri) Minang Mizo Mongolian Myanmar (Burmese) Nahuatl (Eastern Huasteca) Ndau Ndebele (South) Nepalbhasa (Newari) Nepali NKo Norwegian Nuer Occitan Odia (Oriya) Oromo Ossetian Pangasinan Papiamento Pashto Persian Polish Portuguese (Brazil) Portuguese (Portugal) Punjabi (Gurmukhi) Punjabi (Shahmukhi) Quechua Qʼeqchiʼ Romani Romanian Rundi Russian Sami (North) Samoan Sango Sanskrit Santali (Latin) Santali (Ol Chiki) Scots Gaelic Sepedi Serbian Sesotho Seychellois Creole Shan Shona Sicilian Silesian Sindhi Sinhala Slovak Slovenian Somali Spanish Sundanese Susu Swahili Swati Swedish Tahitian Tajik Tamazight Tamazight (Tifinagh) Tamil Tatar Telugu Tetum Thai Tibetan Tigrinya Tiv Tok Pisin Tongan Tshiluba Tsonga Tswana Tulu Tumbuka Turkish Turkmen Tuvan Twi Udmurt Ukrainian Urdu Uyghur Uzbek Venda Venetian Vietnamese Waray Welsh Wolof Xhosa Yakut Yiddish Yoruba Yucatec Maya Zapotec Zulu
Powered by Translate
Afrikaans Albanian Arabic Armenian Azerbaijani Basque Belarusian Bengali Bosnian Bulgarian Catalan Chinese (Simplified) Czech Danish Dutch Estonian Filipino Finnish French Galician Georgian German Greek Gujarati Haitian Creole Hausa Hawaiian Hebrew Hindi Hmong Hungarian Icelandic Igbo Indonesian Irish Italian Japanese Javanese Kannada Kazakh Khmer Korean Kurdish (Kurmanji) Kyrgyz Lao Latin Latvian Lithuanian Luxembourgish Macedonian Malagasy Malay Malayalam Maltese Maori Marathi Mongolian Myanmar (Burmese) Nepali Norwegian Pashto Persian Polish Portuguese Punjabi Romanian Russian Samoan Scottish Gaelic Serbian Sesotho Shona Sindhi Sinhala Slovak Slovenian Somali Spanish Sudanese Swedish Tajik Tamil Telugu Thai Turkish Ukrainian Urdu Uzbek Vietnamese Welsh Xhosa Yiddish Yoruba Zulu
Mompox: a colonial island in the Magdalena River
Mompox
27 °C
Inicio
Blog
Mompox: a colonial island in the Magdalena River
This block is broken or missing. You may be missing content or you might need to enable the original module.
Favorites
Search
Church in Mompox
Photo by: Cesar Pineda
Close to the famous city of Cartagena de Indias , in the department of Bolívar, is Santa Cruz de Mompox, a magical town on an island in the middle of the Magdalena River. It exudes history, romanticism, and nostalgia in every corner, especially along the Calle Real del Medio, or Main Royal Street, the most important of all streets and the one that concentrates the most captivating architectural sites.
In colonial times, the town was an important trade center thanks to the navigability of the Magdalena River and its remoteness from the Caribbean Sea, which enabled it to remain free from the attacks of pirates and corsairs. While military constructions reflected in bulwarks and walls grew in Cartagena, a classic, Sevillian-style religious architecture flourished in Mompox and remains today as evidence of those good times.
Many powerful people protected their capital and made important investments in Mompox. By reason of these winds of progress, the transport of gold and its delivery into the hands of Mompox artisans took place. Thus, began the prestige of their art of fine metalworking .
For a long time, Mompox was a strategic location between two powers. On the one hand, Santa Fe de Bogotá in the center of the country; on the other, Cartagena de Indias on the ocean’s shores
Towards the end of the 18th century, Mompox was one of the most important towns in the New Kingdom of Granada. Its boom continued into the 19th century, when it declared its absolute independence from Spain in 1810 and earned the title of "Courageous City".
Back in those times, Mompox was vitality and progress, but the bonanza began to change by nature's fault. Erosion and sedimentation changed the course of the Magdalena River, a circumstance that increased the volume of the Loba arm of the river and decreased that of the Mompox arm. The commercial and social life of the town diminished and soon after began the exodus of its inhabitants to other regions.
The town became an island enclosed by the Loba and Mompox arms of the river and access became very difficult. Perhaps this is one of the reasons why time seems to have come to a standstill in Mompox. Yet it is also for this reason that it arouses the curiosity to know the island and surrender to its charms.
The traditional architecture of Mompox
Magdalena River
Photo by: Bernard Gagnon
Among religious architecture, the churches of Santo Domingo, San Juan de Dios, San Agustín, and Santa Barbara stand out. For its history and structure, the latter is especially revered by the residents. The temple is located on the street of La Albarrada, which runs parallel to the river, and on which Casa 1734 and Portales de la Marquesa are also situated.
The Casa de la Cultura, or Culture House, the Bolívar and Santander Parks, the Te Deum House, the Justice Palace, and the Museum of Religious Art are found along the Main Royal Street. They were all built with rammed earth, and have clay tiles and iron windows with shelves, railings, and pentice roofs.
Other streets, such as La Calle de Atrás, lead to the Santo Domingo Church and the cemetery. The latter is a well-preserved location that pays homage to the memory of General Hermógenes Maza and the well-known Black poet Candelario Obeso, famous for his Cantos populares de mi tierra and Canción der bogá ausente .
Holy Week in Mompox
A tour of Mompox is also a review of history and the fervent Holy Week celebrations that are still maintained, beginning with the processions of the week following Ash Wednesday. Momposinos are friendly and happy, but preserve their ascetic character when it comes to celebrating Holy Week, the time of year when the influx of tourists is greatest.
Yet at any time of year a trip to Mompox is fascinating on account of stories heard, old, dilapidated constructions, and intellectual and historical discussion groups that do not cease to debate about the country’s events and the town’s history.
How to get to Mompox
Santodomingo Park
Photo by: James Bailey
Despite the fact that the Botón de Leyva Bridge that joins Mompox to the municipality of El Banco (department of Magdalena) is now open and that it is the only access to the island by land, the most common way of arriving is via Cartagena. The route leaves Cartagena and crosses Magangué and Yatí in the department of Bolívar, where a ferry on the Magdalena River travels to a location known as La Bodega. From there, the road to Mompox winds its way through various plantations and cattle haciendas.
Shopping in Mompox
If it is about shopping for valuable gold pieces, Mompox jewelers enjoy international fame for their marvelous filigree art . There is also a demand for furniture like the traditional rocking chairs, and delicious food like capa cheese and Doña Ada’s lemon dessert are good companions during tours of the town.
View more
-
You may also be interested in
10 Tips for a Family Trip to Colombia
Discover 5 Hotels in Colombia with Authentic Local Experiences
Bike routes in Colombia you should know about
Explore Caño Cristales, the river of seven colors
Read all
WHAT SHOULD YOU KNOW IF YOU ARE GOING TO TRAVEL TO COLOMBIA?
Prepare your trip to the country of beauty with information designed for you and enrich your visit to Colombia,
a place of natural wealth and vibrant culture.
CURRENCY AND
PAYMENT METHODS
HEALTH
AND SAFETY
TRANSPORT
AND MOBILITY
CLIMATE
AND SEASONS
ABOUT
COLOMBIA
REQUIREMENTS AND
DOCUMENTATION
ATTENTION LINES
28th Street No 13A - 15 35-36th Floor
Bogotá - Colombia
+57 601 5600100
Fax: +57 601 5600104
Mon - Fri 8:30 A.M. - 5:30 P.M
OUR AXES
ProColombia
Invest
Trade
Travel
Country Brand
LINKS OF INTEREST
Citizen Services
Sustainability Reports
About us
FAQs
PQRFS
Contact
Copyright © 2024. Terms and Conditions - Read about changes in our Privacy and Data Protection Policy
X
Buscar
Close menu
× Original text
Rate this translation
Your feedback will be used to help improve Google Translate